Project: Modelling the dissolved oxygen cycle (DO) on the Salish Sea:

 Understanding dissolved oxygen (DO) variability in the Salish Sea????:
    A.  Evaluation of DO simulation against available observations (Canadian and US):
            1.  Compare 202111 and 201905R DO simulations (in progress):
                All depths, Top 5 m, Bellow 5 m:
                    ... 
                Regional scale:
                    SS_all (Salish Sea): ...
                    SoG_north (Strait of Georgia): ...
                    SoG_center: ..
                    SoG_south: ...
                    Harro_boundary: ...
                    JDF_est (Juan De Fuca): ...
                    JDF_west: ...
                    PS_main (Puget Sound, ckecking data in Keegan report): ...

            2.  Seasonal variability of DO concentration, Comparison between different sites (based on available data per area):
                What is the impact of physical and biological processes?:
                    Check timeseries of Wind Speed (or stress), currents, temperature, salinity
                    and also chl-a, nitrate, phytoplancton biomass, DO
                    Focus on the happening in the bottom layer
                    potential role of exchange at the water-sediment interface 

            3.  Can hypoxic or anoxic situations be encountered in the Salish Sea?:
                    At the bottom layer?
                    What conditions, if any, might generate them?

            4.  High frequency:
                what role does the tide play in oxygen fluctuations?
                what about internal wave?
    
    B.  Model analysis:
            to be done...
    

    
    Bifore that: Literature review (understanding physical and biogechemical processes in the Salish Sea)
    Working plan:
        What is done until now ???
    
Literature review: 
    Olson et al. (2020): 
        Assesssment of Nutrient Supply by a tidal jet in the northern Strait of Georgia:
        3D SMELT evaluate with NO3, Si and Chl observations
        Methodological analysis: Willmott skill scores, root-mean square error (RMSE), check bias
        Tidal Jet from Discovery Passage --- downstream plume of elevated surface nitrate from April to September 

        + 200 rivers empty into the Salish Sea (Frazer River is the largest source of freshwater – Thomson, 1981).
        Stratification dominated by salinity under influence of Frazer River + destruction (inverse effect) of stratification by mixing due to wind and tide – Masson and Pena, 2009
        Tidal mixing most stronger near sills, shoals, narrow passages (San Juan/Gulf Islands region, Johnstone Strait, other in the northern Strait of Georgia)

        Tidal mixing impacts on nutrient availability and biological activity
        Chl maximum occurs at the deph of maximum water column stability
        Strong tidal mixing in Salish Sea shapes spatial and temporal patterns in new productivity
        Tidal jet (well-mixed) has been linked to nutrient (Haigh and Taylor, 1991), elevated biomass (Haigh and Taylor, 1991), and reduced diatom biomass (Haigh and Taylor, 1991;Masson and Pena, 2009). 

        Largest nitrogen source is transport of nitrate through the Strait of Juan de Fuca du to estuarine exchange (Khangaonkar et al., 2018; Mackas and Harisonn, 1997; Sutton et al., 2013). 

        Physical model: NEMO, horizontal resolution (~500 m), vertical resolution (1-27 m), detail of model decribtion: Soontiens and Allen (2017), Soontiens et al. (2016)

    Flanangan, Keegan report: 
        An Evaluation of the SalishSeaCast Model in Puget Sound:
            Puget Sound (Admirality Inlet, Main Basin, South Basin, Whidbey Basin and Hood Canal Basin)
            Too different each other (Cannon et al., 1990; Thomson 1994; Ebbesmeyer et al., 1990)
            ~ 2 months of average residence time (Sutherland et al., 2011) for Puget Sound
        
            - 14 major rivers that supply freshwater
        
            - SalishSeaCast Model (NEMO-SMELT)
            NEMO: Nucleus for European Modelling of the Ocean for the physics
            SMELT: Salish Model Ecosystem Lower Trophic for the biology (several diffent versions)
        
        Data: 
            Washington Departement of Ecology:
                Data types: nitrogen, silicon, ammonia and chlorophyll from bottle; temperature, salinity, and chlorophyll data via CTD
                /ocean/eolson/MEOPAR/obs/WADE/ptools_data/ecology
        
            Northwest Environmental Moorings:
                Variables: temperature, salinity, solar radiation, wind speed and direction, nutrients, oxygen, and chlorophyll concentrations, turbidity gas exchange parameters and currents
                /ocean/kflanaga/MEOPAR/savedData/ORCAData
        
            King County Moorings:
                2014-2020 (Point Williams buoy); 2009-2020 (Dockton buoy): water and air temperature, salinity, turbidity, pH, dissolved oxygen and chlorophyll fluorescence concentration, air pressure, wind speed and direction, rain fall, photosynthetically active radiation, and relative humidity
                /ocean/kflanaga/MEOPAR/savedData/King_CountyData
